SOURCE: https://cdn11.bigcommerce.com/s-m5qljysoqy/content/look-inside/CKLIST-7.pdf
TITLE: A Pilot Guide to the Successful Airline Interview (Checklist)


CHECKLIST for SUCCESS
A Pilot’s Guide to the
Successful Airline Interview
CHECKLIST for SUCCESS
CHERYL A. CAGESEVENTH EDITIONA Pilot’s Guide to the
Successful Airline Interview
AVIATION  SUPPLIES  & ACADE MICS
NEWCASTLE, WASHINGTON  
Checklist for Success: A Pilot’s Guide to the Successful Airline Interview
Seventh Edition
Cheryl A. Cage
Aviation Supplies and Academics, Inc.
7005 132nd Place SE
Newcastle, WA  98059-3153
asa@asa2fly.com  | www.asa2fly.com
© 1994–2020  Cheryl Cage
Seventh Edition published 2020 by Aviation Supplies & Academics, Inc.
1994–2002 Editions published by Cage Consulting, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system without 
written permission from the author.
Disclaimer: This book is a general information book on preparing for an airline pilot interview. It is understood 
that the information contained in this book does not guarantee success. The author and publisher shall have 
neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused, or alleged to 
be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in this book.
Printed in the United States of America
2022 2021 2020    9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ASA-CKLIST-7
ISBN 978-1-61954-945-6
Additional formats available:
Kindle  ISBN 978-1-61954-947-0
eBook ePub ISBN 978-1-61954-946-3
eBook PDF ISBN 978-1-61954-948-7
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 94-92311 
06
To Young  
For your never-ending encouragement.
  viiWhat People Say!
Mr. Don Skiados, Director  
Air Line Pilots Association Communications Dept.
As director of communications for the Air Line Pilots Association, the 
nation’s largest trade union for professional airline pilots, I have had the 
pleasure of doing business with Cage Consulting, Inc. since its founding in 
1988. And as a professional communicator myself for more than 30 years, I 
know the kind of quality products its founder, Cheryl Cage, delivers.
Her name has become synonymous with providing exceptional quality 
career guidance, from the interview process to keeping an individual’s 
career progression on track. Her popular seminars draw on her vast knowl -
edge and thorough preparation and provide information in a comfortable, 
friendly atmosphere. Checklist for Success , her book on the (pilot) interview 
process, has become the definitive “how-to” manual for our members, and 
she pioneered in the industry with the first interactive CD interview prepa -
ration guide. Our Association values the relationship we have established 
with Cage Consulting.
Captain Jim West,  Allied Pilots Association —  
National Membership/ Furlough Committee
With over 2,000 American Airlines Pilots and their families’ lives being 
changed with their furlough notice from American Airlines, APA’s 
National Membership/Furlough Committee hosted Cage Seminars for our 
Furloughed Pilots. All who attended found the information very useful and 
the one thing I noticed at the completion of the seminars was that the pilots 
felt more confident about their future. Unlike other Aviation Consulting 
Firms, Cheryl has developed a seminar that provides the necessary tools 
to help pilots find employment in other fields while awaiting recall to the 
cockpit. I strongly recommend anyone who is facing the possibility of a 
furlough to contact Cage Consulting. The information gained is invaluable.
viii Checklist for SuccessCaptain David Smith  
Chairman, United Airlines Pilot Council 33
I wanted to send you a big thank you for the exceptional work you and your 
company accomplished on behalf of the United Airline’s furloughed pilots. 
Your seminar entitled “The Resilient Pilot” was very well received. The 
feedback from the attendees included noting of the relaxed atmosphere, the 
interactive approach, and the real-life solutions that were provided to the 
participants. It is quite obvious that the perceived value of furloughee semi -
nars to this pilot group. Thanks again for your time and effort in making 
this seminar happen. 
Patty Taylor  
Former Manager of Pilot Recruitment, American Airlines
Because of Cheryl’s excellent reputation in the aviation industry, in equal 
parts because of her books and her consulting services, Cheryl’s name is 
always a draw. And, audiences are never disappointed! Cheryl’s advice, 
enthusiasm, and optimism keeps the audiences’ attention. Her easy-going 
style encourages members of the audience (no matter how shy) to feel 
comfortable asking questions and voicing concerns. I wholeheartedly 
recommend Cheryl as a speaker for any aviation, or general audience, 
career conference. 
Captain Christopher Beebe  
Chairman USAirways Master Executive Council (ALPA)
I hired Ms. Cage to conduct Airline Interview Preparation and Resume 
Workshops for US Airways. Her workshops were thorough, organized, 
filled with specific ideas and suggestions, and delivered with optimism and 
motivation. Ms. Cage has a personality that invites openness and discus -
sion. With her innate ability to assess personal situations, years of aviation 
involvement and education, Cheryl is well qualified to discuss today’s 
airline interviewing process. 
Captain Al Neil,  American Airlines
Thank you for your excellent presentation. As a mentor and mentor coor -
dinator, sometimes I get bogged down with the responsibility, but when I 
hear an organized, well-thought-out approach to problems it sure takes a 
load off my mind. I am deeply grateful.
CageMarshall Consulting
www.cageconsulting.com
  ixContents
Foreword  ..................................................................................  xi
W. H. Traub, VP Flight Standards and Training (Ret.),  
United Airlines 
Introduction to the Seventh Edition  ....................................... xiii
Introductions Through the Years:  
First Edition  .................................................................... xv
Fifth Edition  ................................................................... xvii
Points to Consider  ................................................................... xix
1 Getting the Interview  ........................................................ 1
 “To Interview” Criteria
 Increasing Your Odds
2 Nine Steps to a Successful Interview  ................................ 5
3 Demystifying the Process  .................................................. 9
 Why Are They Asking That?
 The Interview Process
4 The Interviewer  ................................................................ 13
 The Role
 The Style of the Interview
5 The Applicant  ................................................................... 21
 Responsibilities
 Common Mistakes
6 Self-Evaluation  ................................................................. 33
 Discovering Your Stories 
 Telling Your Stories and Response Formats
 Translating Questions
 Addressing Problem Areas
x Checklist for Success7 Physical Presentation  ....................................................... 61
 Interview Attire
 The Mock Interview
8 Paperwork Presentation  .................................................. 67
 Resume Example
 Completing Applications
 Cover Letters
9 Information Gathering  ..................................................... 75
 What You’ll Need
 Information Worksheet
 Social Media
10 From the Professionals  .................................................... 83
 Advice from Interviewers
11 Common Applicant Concerns  .......................................... 91
12 Before/During/After Checklist  ........................................ 99
 Do I Have Everything?
 After the Interview
13 Sample Interview Questions ......................................... 103
14 The Results  .................................................................... 107
 Success or More Interviews?
 Industry Circumstances
 In Closing
About the Author  .................................................................... 111
Career Services from CageMarshall Consulting  ..................... 113
  xiForeword
I have had the honor of participating in the hiring program for a 
major airline for almost twenty years. During that period of time I 
have found that, for a pilot applicant, the most difficult step of the 
selection process is the interview phase. You might wonder why an 
applicant with superb technical skills and excellent experience is 
turned down due to an inability to interview successfully. In Check -
list for Success  you will learn why airlines consider the interview 
phase of the selection process to be such an important step in the 
overall evaluation of applicants. Let me quote a very compelling 
paragraph found in this book: “…solid technical skills do not always 
guarantee the best overall candidate. For example, in one National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) investigation, over 
60 accidents where crew-coordination played a significant role were 
studied…Common factors among these accidents included: preoccu -
pation with minor technical problems, inadequate leadership, failure 
to delegate tasks and assign responsibilities, failure to set priorities, 
inadequate monitoring, failure to utilize available data, and failure to 
communicate intent and plans. The National Transportation Safety 
Board (NTSB) estimates that these ‘human factors’ contribute to 70% 
to 80% of airplane crashes.”
Over the years I’ve had the opportunity to talk to a number of candi -
dates about the employment process, some after an unsuccessful 
interview. All of the advice that I could provide is contained in this 
book in a very well written format. Your careful reading and study 
of this material, although it cannot guarantee success, will certainly 
enhance your chances.
xii Checklist for SuccessLet me provide one other very important quote from the book: “An 
employee with a positive attitude is invaluable to any employer…A 
positive attitude lays the groundwork for good communication and 
positive team interaction.”
Again, this is very sound advice and is exactly what we are looking 
for in the hiring process.
By considering Checklist for Success  you have taken an important 
step toward improving your competitiveness, which will increase 
your chances of being hired into one of the most rewarding, best 
professions available.
W. H. Traub  
Vice President  
Flight Standards and Training (Ret.)  
United Airlines
  xiiiIntroduction 
to the Seventh Edition
It is one of the great joys of my life that I seem to have written a book, 
and provided services, that have helped people achieve their goals a 
little quicker and with a bit less stress. The fact that my work contin -
ues to be relevant after 31 years is an added bonus. This seventh 
edition of Checklist for Success  is updated with different ways to 
uncover your stories and more tips to help you alleviate simple, but 
damaging, mistakes.
But I did not do it alone. I had the partnership of Angie Marshall 
who took over as President of Cage Marshall Consulting in 2004. 
Angie was Cage Consulting’s second employee back in 1994 (I 
was the first) and we’ve been together ever since. Angie is, without 
a doubt, one of the main reasons Cage Marshall Consulting has 
survived for over 31 years.
During my time away (working in politics and slogging through the 
death of my husband) I never, not for one millisecond, worried about 
the business. Angie cared for each and every client with dedica -
tion and kindness. The business not only survived, but dramatically 
thrived under Angie’s leadership.
I also want to thank all our clients, past and future. It is a real plea -
sure to work with such dedicated, smart and motivated individuals.
Safe travels,
Cheryl Cage  
Tucson, Arizona  
2020 
  xvIntroductions 
Through the Years
First Edition (1994)
The decision to write this workbook came from a simple, but difficult 
situation. In 1988, I developed an Airline Pilot Interview Preparation 
Program. Happily, this program seemed to bring success to more 
than a few of my clients. Through referrals from this first group of 
pilot clients my phone started ringing. A client list, which was small 
and manageable in 1989 became overwhelming in 1990. Since I 
worked with each and every client I found myself having to say, “My 
calendar is full and I am unable to take any new clients at this time.” 
It was either that or work 7 days a week, 18 hours a day. (I tried that 
for a few months, and I do not recommend it!)
Every time I had to say no I felt terrible. I found myself in this 
uncomfortable situation more often than I care to remember and 
finally came to the conclusion that although I couldn’t clone myself, I 
could clone my program. I decided to put the program in workbook 
form. My objective was to design a manual which would allow pilots 
to prepare for airline interviews on their own. I wanted to write a 
“user friendly” manual that could be referred to by pilots of any 
experience level . This workbook is the result.
The Process
Cage Consulting began as a general job search service. My clients 
were professionals from all fields. My introduction to working with 
pilots came when I offered my resume services to a small group of 
pilots living in the Denver area. These pilots had recently lost their 
jobs due to the bankruptcy of their airline.
xvi Checklist for SuccessWhile working with these individuals I sensed a pervasive belief that 
technical background and experience were all that was needed to se -
cure a new airline job. This was outdated thinking and it disturbed me.
That distress proved legitimate. Even with the wealth of experience 
these professional pilots had to offer, without exception this group 
was unsuccessful in their initial attempts at landing new cockpit 
positions.
What these pilots had failed to understand was that the selection 
process had changed over the years. Flight departments were no 
longer just searching for people with technical proficiency in flying. 
Airlines were interested in hiring individuals with highly developed 
management, communication, and team-player skills in addition to  
technical skills.
To discuss one’s abilities in these introspective areas required a 
different kind of preparation than these pilots had ever experienced.
Having watched these professionals stumble—and not wanting to see 
it happen to others—I was motivated to develop my Pilot Interview 
Preparation Program, and ultimately to write Checklist For Success: 
A Pilot’s Guide to the Successful Airline Interview .
The initial program in 1988 was based on my work with busi -
ness professionals, discussions with pilot interviewers at the major 
airlines, and my own airline background. Since 1989 the program 
has been continually reviewed, updated, and expanded. I have 
discussed the interviewing process with flight officer interviewers, 
chief pilots, and aviation medical experts. I have spent many, many 
hours debriefing my clients after their interviews.
This workbook will take you from application and resume prepara -
tion through to the actual interview. It is my sincere hope that the 
information included in this workbook will make your journey to 
the cockpit a bit easier.Flight departments 
were no longer 
just searching 
for people with 
technical proficiency 
in flying.
  xviiFifth Edition (2002)
The Impact of World Events on the  
Pilot Selection Process
At 0915 on September 11, 2001 I sat snugly in Row 13, Seat C of 
a United A320 enjoying my first cup of coffee. The flight had just 
departed Dulles International Airport and I was feeling extremely 
satisfied with my life. I was returning home after hosting a very 
successful 50th Wedding Anniversary celebration for my parents, 
and Cage Consulting was on the road to having our best year ever. 
Twenty minutes later the world looked very different. Once I knew 
my family and friends were safe my thoughts over the course of 
the next four days (as I “planed, trained and automobiled” my way 
home) were mostly about my clients and the career challenges they 
were going to be facing.
Interestingly, I never considered that aspiring professional pilots 
would change career plans. This thought never occurred to me for 
one simple reason: the overwhelming majority of individuals who 
pursue a pilot career do so because it is what they are driven to do. 
They love the ongoing challenge of flying. Pilots are highly motivated 
individuals regularly forced to handle difficult situations and pilots 
have always  had to struggle in an intensely competitive job market. 
No, I knew that the majority of people destined to become pilots 
would simply view this as another (albeit an unusually large and 
lengthy) career setback.
So, what has the impact of that day in September had on the pilot 
selection process? 
Obviously, the numbers of pilots interviewed and hired were dramat -
ically lower. However, although there was increased public discussion 
about background checks of individuals in safety-related positions, 
the already intensely structured and demanding pilot selection 
process itself did not need, nor did it undergo, a dramatic change. In 
terms of change to the pilot selection process the introduction of the 
xviii Checklist for SuccessPilot Records Improvement Act mandating a five-year background 
check had more of an impact on the applicant and the process.
Airlines are still looking for future captains, individuals with strong 
leadership, conflict-resolution and decision-making abilities. The 
method of preparation I have advocated since 1988 remains the same 
today: gain an understanding of the interviewer’s responsibilities, 
embark on a strong course of self-evaluation and become adept at 
describing your traits using personal stories. If you do your home -
work your chances for a job offer will significantly improve.
The turmoil experienced by the aviation industry has been well 
documented; there is no need to rehash what is widely known. You 
have most likely experienced your share of turmoil along with thou -
sands of other aviation professionals, me included.
So, we’ve shared the turmoil. However, more importantly, we share 
the desire for you to succeed in your chosen field . It pleases me to 
know that you have elected to view this turmoil as a temporary 
setback to your career path. I hope Checklist  will help to make your 
path a bit smoother.
Cheryl Cage  
Marana, Arizona  
September 2004
  xixPoints to Consider
In preparing for an interview you will discover a great deal of “simple” 
advice (for example: provide all applicable documentation when 
discussing a problem area; keep your resume to one page; wear a suit; 
never say “I have no answer to that question”). Each piece of “simple” 
advice is like a piece of a jigsaw puzzle. Taken separately they can be 
confusing. Put them all together and the picture becomes clear.
Although I have worked hard to present this advice and information 
in a logical order, there are times when a comment may seem out 
of place in Chapter 1, only to make perfect sense upon completing 
Chapter 3.
For this reason I ask that you read the entire workbook before begin -
ning your chapter-by-chapter preparation.
When Should I Begin My Preparation?
Preparing for an interview is not like cramming for an exam; it is a 
skill that gets better with time. For this reason, if you are even think -
ing about applying for a new job, begin your preparation.
Remember, your applications are a huge part of your interview. Many 
times, mistakes are made right at the beginning because informa -
tion is presented incorrectly on your initial applications. Application 
reviews should be considered part of your interview preparation.
Military and Civilian Applicants
Although terminology, supervisor titles, and job responsibilities may 
differ, examples gathered from a military career and a civilian career 
share a great many similarities. Every pilot, of every training back -
ground, should focus on being able to share their approaches in the 
xx Checklist for Successareas of interest to a pilot interviewer. (More information available in 
Chapter 6: Self-Evaluation.)
Airline Interviews
This workbook is written from the perspective of interviewing with 
a major carrier. However, the same approach should be used for any 
pilot interview.
He or She?
For no other reason than clarity, masculine pronouns are used 
throughout this workbook.
  11Getting the Interview
“To Interview” Criteria
Waiting for a pilot interview can be a frustrating and anxiety-ridden 
experience. During this waiting period, trips to the mailbox take on 
a whole new dimension.
Applicants invited to an interview are selected based on criteria 
deemed important by the individual airline. This “to interview” 
criteria basically consists of concrete information such as flight time, 
type of flight jobs held, ratings, and education. This criteria can 
change depending on the experience level of the available applicants. 
It is important to remember that your application is constantly being 
judged based on the competition at the time .
A clear example of this fact: in 1982 Braniff became the first major air -
line to go into bankruptcy. Until that time the majority of major airline 
pilot applicants came from the military, commuter airlines, and corpo -
rate flight departments. Because of the seniority system, it was virtually 
unheard of to have an airline pilot leave one carrier to start over with 
another. Deregulation, the tidal wave of bankruptcies, and the airlines’ 
newly enlightened view of “seasoned” pilots changed all that.
After 1982, the traditional applicant (who came directly from the 
military or the commuter/corporate world) became overshadowed 
by the scores of experienced ex-airline pilots flooding the market. It 
was not unusual for these ex-airline pilots to have 20 years of airline 
experience and over 10,000 hours of flying time. Because the airlines 
had this abundance of highly qualified applicants to choose from, 
not surprisingly, the traditional pilot-applicants were put on the 
bottom of the “to interview” list. The high experience level of these 
displaced airline pilots caused the criteria  for being invited for an 
interview to change.Your application is 
constantly being 
judged based on  
the competition at 
the time.
2 Checklist for SuccessNo matter what circumstances the airline industry is facing (massive 
hiring or massive furloughs), the same basic premise is a constant 
within the “to interview” selection process. If you are a pilot with a 
bachelors degree, 1,500 hours of flight time, and in your first year of 
working for a commuter, but the majority of available pilot appli -
cants possess a bachelors degree, 2,500 hours, and three years of 
commuter experience you can assume that you will not be selected 
for an interview until those applicants have been reviewed .
Increasing Your Odds
For these reasons it is imperative that you continue to update your 
skills and background. You must never stop working to increase your 
marketability. Some ideas:
• Keep flying and building your hours
• Earn additional ratings and certifications
• If you are in the military, earn your civilian ratings
• Continue to upgrade at the earliest possible time
• Complete your bachelors degree or higher education degrees
In addition to specific training and education there are other steps 
you can take that may help put your name closer to the top of an 
airline’s “to interview” list.
• Find out if there are any “airline specific” steps you can take to 
increase your chances for an interview (for example: a letter of 
recommendation from a pilot or other employee).
Make sure you ask the right people if a particular process is accept -
able. One of my clients was given the advice from a company pilot 
to “just take your application to the employment office and wait 
until someone will talk to you.” Luckily, my client asked around 
and discovered that this type of action was actually looked upon as 
overly aggressive and not very polite. Someone within the Person -
nel Department would have been the logical person to ask if this 
approach was acceptable.
 Chapter 1    Getting the Interview 3• If a company pilot offers to hand-carry your application into the 
employment office, make sure you know how this individual is 
viewed by the company.
I had one client who had his application hand-carried to the airline’s 
employment office by a senior captain. Unfortunately, he found out too 
late that this captain had been involved in numerous altercations with 
the employment office concerning applicants he felt should be hired. 
(Although this client was not harmed in this particular instance, it 
caused him a great deal of concern and many sleepless nights.)
• Update your applications on a regular basis. Be sure to follow the 
airline’s update schedule. If they allow an update once every six 
months, do not send a new application every three months.
• By all means exploit your network! If the brother of your college 
roommate’s wife is the V.P. of Flight Operations for an airline you 
want to work for—seek an introduction.
There is no magic formula for securing an interview. However, by 
following these steps you can rest at night knowing you are doing 
everything possible to get your foot in the door.There is no magic 
formula for securing 
an interview. 

