TITLE: shFqzjcK-OA_Airline Recruiters on Pilot Confidence： What Gets You Hired .en
SOURCE: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=shFqzjcK-OA

Kind: captions Language: en You are listening to the Airline Selection Podcast where we bring you insights to help you succeed at airline selections. This podcast is brought to you by Airline Selection Program. Please welcome your host, airline captain and major airline recruiter, Guom Debushe. [music] Hi D, it's nice to see you again. So what are we going to talk about today? &gt;&gt; Hi GM, it's nice to see you too. So today a topic that I brought for you is well it's still connected to the pilot superpower u package that we are doing now. Okay. And I was thinking that today we can talk about confidence and overconfidence. What do you think about that? &gt;&gt; Yeah, good. Good. I'm confident that this is a good topic. &gt;&gt; Hopefully not too overconfident. Yes. Okay. All right. Uh, so yeah. Would you like to introduce to our viewers what confidence and overconfidence is or should I do it? &gt;&gt; Um, well, since you you you're you're offering it to me. Well, I think being confident is um is directly linked to your competence. First of all, if you've studied, if you've prepared, and it's true for everything in life, you you are more likely to be confident. there's a direct connection between the two. Um, of course, there is also a psych um, a personality trait behind that. Some people tend to be confident or others on the other end of the scale of this one personality factor can be more anxious. They are less confident in we're talking about trusting yourself here about confidence about themselves. And then there was sorry and then there was the matter of overconfidence. So someone who is very anxious, they don't trust themselves, if that's a personality trait that they have. &gt;&gt; Well, of course, this is becoming a problem after a while, okay? Because even though if they study, they still don't trust themselves. This is the person then when they leave their house, they go back up three times to make sure that the door is locked. You know, that's that's not okay. You're not going to be able to dispatch the plane like that or you're going to feel emotionally terrible if you if you do. And then at the other end of the scale, there is the person who is too confident, overconfident. This is your your maverick, so to say, right? This is the the person that even though the weather's bad and they still going to take minimum fuel or they they're just not going to pay too much attention to a situation that's not great because it was okay last time and don't worry, it will be fine. This is a very dangerous be behavior linked also in some cases on a more technical tactical standpoint to confirmation bias. But this this these are dangerous behaviors. So what's important is to be confident I would say more on the confident side than the anxious side but not to be overconfident. And if you have signs in yourself that you're overconfident it's likely the psychologist is going to see it as a problem. Of course, if you have also anxiety, which could be clinical, even if it's extreme, this is going to be a problem. Okay? So, confidence is expected. Doubt is also healthy. We need both because if you don't feel it, uh if you're not sure whether you got the takeoff clearance or not, you got to query it. Okay? &gt;&gt; So, you need a healthy amount. So I would say on a scale of 1 to 10 and that's what we've worked out with um our psychologist and the 16PF well the 16PF psychologist that have helped us modilize the pilot role to the extent that we know it today is ideally you want someone who's between sort of three and five or six. So three being quite confident but not too confident and doesn't get too far in the anxiety. Okay, that's the ideal uh portion. If you want to know more about that, come into advanced interview course because don't worry, it's not because you're seven anxious that that you can't be a pilot. No, it would have to combine with something else and then maybe we're going to have a discussion. Okay. So, I think I took a lot of your introduction, Donna. So, why don't you continue? &gt;&gt; No worries. No worries. Now, maybe we can just summarize uh the difference between competence and overcompetence. Um just to make it a bit clearer. Um I would say that yeah confidence is definitely as you explained a realistic belief in your abilities that is added on top of uh of competence and then overconfidence would be I would call it maybe a cognitive distortion when you overestimate your own abilities &gt;&gt; and actually there is something that was connected here that I would want uh to introduce it's well the name is not very important but it's called the Dunning Krueger effect which is when people with the no ability in a certain topic they overestimate their uh competence because they just lack the awareness or the knowledge to recognize where they are at that certain um at that certain level so that they don't recognize their own mistakes. &gt;&gt; Okay. And then another quite interesting thing that I think um we we also fall into that sometimes is when we believe that we are better than the average although of course statistically it doesn't make sense everyone to be um above the average. So &gt;&gt; yeah because if everybody thinks they're above average then then then the average makes no sense. That's what you mean, right? Yeah. Of course. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So of course that when you are just starting out with your career then sometimes you can feel like an impostor maybe like okay I I've studied hard to to be here but maybe it still feels like um that you're a little bit out of place. Of course you have to get used to uh being on the flight deck and um just gather some experience but um &gt;&gt; imposter imposter syndrome is something we all face and it's very very active during selections this imposter syndrome &gt;&gt; you you arrive there you worked and somehow you feel almost it could be even in the in the waiting room going like have I fooled myself into this and are they going to to see this this sort strange. So, well, you're right there, right next to the finish line. You've got these thoughts that can creep into your mind or they could creep into your mind the day before and you can't really control it when that happens. I've I've had that happen. Um, and well, just know that it happens to everybody as they're about to reach a huge goal that they would sort of pull the whole structure they've built over their own head because of this. So, don't let this happen to you. to just, you know, just try and remember why you did this, that you've worked hard, you've earned your seat, you belong in the on on this interview chair, you know, and and you belong in this airline. Uh, and that's but know that it is normal. And if you feel a strong imposter syndrome, I would say several weeks before maybe Dana, get in contact with Dana or any psychologist that can help you work through it because it's not it shouldn't be a big deal &gt;&gt; to to to work through that. Yeah. And something uh that I want to mention here is that a lot of people do tell me that yeah well how do I how do I become confident because they are waiting for a certain feeling. They want to feel confident to start doing something &gt;&gt; and I always tell them that well confidence is not a feeling. I would like to put it in a way that confidence is more of an act of putting yourself out there and trying. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. In a way it's earned. you earn it. &gt;&gt; Maybe maybe you have it inside of you, but then you could quickly get overconfident. &gt;&gt; Uh but you know, you earn your confidence. You work and you get results. That's the that's the idea. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. And I wanted to ask you about Okay. Well, first you still have to gather some confidence, but then what are the ways how can you keep yourself from becoming overconfident? &gt;&gt; Well, again, it's about this meta attention. Um, and about, you know, this meta attention, having a little bit of yourself outside yourself, having a little bit of of yourself outside your head and in your body to feel. If you don't feel the doubt because you're too much in your head, then you don't feel the emotion, the physical symptoms of the doubt, which normally there's a little pit in your stomach that tells you something's wrong, something's off. I don't know what it is. Let's just stop this. Okay, we've forgotten something. I don't know what it is, but okay, this this this is very healthy. So listening to your body, listening to your emotions is very helpful. Um there's a reason why we have these emotions and actually I'll give you a tip here. Um this is a great way to answer the question at the interview of what makes you doubt. Are you someone who doubts a lot is another way that you could phrase it. When was the last time you doubted? Well, here sometimes at the interview it's worth instead of answering directly on this one to give a bit of a masterclass on some CRM concept. uh you could do do this in this instance. So you could this is particularly fit when they want to find out your relationship with SOPs that you can reassure them of the fact that they are necessary but sometimes they don't work. Well here it's the same thing. You could say well you know uh say they ask um what makes you doubt you say well doubt is a very healthy uh emotion. It's here for a reason. So what makes me doubt? Well is when they have the symptom of the doubt I would clear that doubt. If there's a doubt, there's no doubt. We often say, meaning if there's a doubt, there's no doubt. We're gonna have to clear that doubt. It's here for a reason. It's very safe. So, I think I'm someone when I work, I get results, but when I doubt, I tend to double check. That's it. You see, that's that's a really nice, elegant way to answer. And you can see on this one how people could very quickly stumble upon themselves and start to say things they shouldn't be saying, like a terrible doubt that they had or an mistake that they made. Don't go there. Okay? So, Yeah. I don't know if I've answered your question. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, you actually did because uh yeah, it's a it's a very nice way that you put it. And um something that connects here is um well, we have also put this small image in the article where we have um discussed how do you build that confidence and what is included in that. And then here we have um we have talked about three different things. One is competence, then there's calibration and then curiosities. These three C's so-called. Um so if I can tell you a little bit more about that and I'm very curious what you uh what you could add to this is that of course as you have mentioned you have to have the competence to um to give yourself a good foundation of um being confident because if you have the technical knowledge or any other kind of knowledge that you have to have to be a pilot this just gives you the belief that you can do it because I think a lot of people believe that okay maybe I just got lucky I got this uh right this one time. But if you prove yourself over and over again, you will believe that okay I have this confidence I can do it. Um so that you can go on with your life in uh in a way how you can build yourself up from there. And of course then we have the calibration part which is about when you know your limits when you know how what what is it that you don't know when is the time to ask for help. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; And I think you mentioned something about that. &gt;&gt; Um well yeah I think we we talked about in a couple of episodes back you know when when there's you know that you sort of something happens and it is not of in your main area of competence. you know, some captains are and some co-pilots are better at some things than at others, you know. So, some people will will know the books extremely well, but um maybe there's a technical area, maybe they're they're not the best at understanding performance in the most detailed way. Some people will be good at manual handling. Some people will be better at managing the autopilot when things get really complex and when the weather's really bad, for instance. you know, everybody's got their little area of of competency and uh and of interest as well. Very simply, you know, I I really enjoyed um I thought because my handling skills, I was an instructor, you know, on light aircraft, so my handling handling's always been something that I thought I I was I was good at and I thought that the autopilot because autopilot is quite complex. Even though these machines that I flew were, you know, the 320 was an end of 1980 and the trip 7 beginning of 1990, there were a lot of intricacies on this autopilot that could catch you and if they catch you on the day when you really need it, meaning that the weather's bad, this is when things could happen. So, I always found that that um um you know, really understanding all the intricacies of the autopilot was something that I could always progress on. This it was kind of my my area of strength. Um, so I had areas where perhaps I was not as strong as others who would fly visual approaches all the time. Yeah, visual approaches was was something I could do, but I I I didn't do very many of them. First of all, at my second airline, it was um something that you wouldn't do unless there was a clear reason why you would do it. And at British Airways, it was allowed. But again because they found there was so many air safety reports on them they it was sort of just try and stick with the instrument approach basically. So it's something but I know my my cousin who's at Air France for instance he he they fly visually they do visual approaches a lot more also because they go to destinations that are a bit more prone they go to a little bit well he was telling me when they go to Martineique and stuff they do that quite a lot on the islands. So anyway, he's better at that than I am, no doubt. And maybe my knowledge on the autopilot was a bit more of my area of specialtity compared to to to him for for instance. I don't know. I'm he's he's very good on the autopilot, too. I know. I'm just saying. &gt;&gt; Everybody's got their little area. Okay. So, &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. So you would you you'd know for in his case u if the weather's really bad and he's getting into an area which is going to mean that he's going to need to use the autopilot and see the runway at the very end. Say it's a complex arnab approach and he's not practiced that as much. Well, this is where he would know that he could come close to his limit. In my case, if I had to do a visual approach and I've not done one for two years, well, I know that this is an area where I'm going to approach my limits. You see, because I've not done it I've done it a long long time ago. So, I'm going to have to rethink of how I'm going to do it. And I'm probably going to do some sort of a hybrid thing when I'm going to use the the autopilot's guidance to fly visually. This is probably what I'm going to do so that I don't miscalculate because my eye is not calibrated anymore to as well as it used to be. very simply &gt;&gt; let's be honest. So &gt;&gt; now in all honesty I last time I I flew a visual approach was in I think it was in 2004. So I flew my whole career at B at B at Emirates without flying a single one. &gt;&gt; Oh okay. &gt;&gt; Interesting. And my cousin he tells me he does them all the time. So &gt;&gt; yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well that's the thing. We all have our uh well these different procedures and also what are we good at and just knowing your limits is uh not only good for knowing when to ask for help but as you said to when it when it's time for you to refresh you &gt;&gt; sorry excuse me refresh your knowledge. I think I talked too much today. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I mean when you prepare for a flight you know what's likely to happen. Okay. So you you know you might want to you're going to need to refresh yourself on this airport on the procedures that are likely to happen &gt;&gt; on you know well typically if the weather's not great &gt;&gt; you're going to start to think of your plan B or plan C and how you're going to execute that and what happens if you get a failure at this point at that point you're going to think about all this stuff so yeah you you definitely need to to prepare so that you um so you arrive confident. Yeah, exactly. But this was only our second step in our little pyramid because at the top I think what stands is curiosity and curiosity it just it makes you open uh for learning so that it prevents this stagnation and complacency &gt;&gt; and it definitely adds to the growth mindset because well you don't want to be stuck in uh the position where you are now but you just have the willingness to uh to be open to whatever comes your and how you can be better how you can be a better pilot but also a better human being. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. Um being curious is is important. Um I I often I think I started doing that at BA after I took the advice of a captain who told me if something happens on your flight on a flight anything maybe you have an MEL about an electrical system that's not working so we have we we take off you know with with with a failure that's allowed and well that's an opportunity in the cruise to read about that system you know if something happened there was a sick passenger maybe and we have to offload their bags um and get them the medical care they need maybe it's the time in the cruise later on on that day You're going to take a look at everything in the manual that relates to that and maybe look also at the cabin crew manual to see what they have been doing. So you get a better understanding getting curious. If you have a very strong knowledge base, your path to a good decision is less steep. If you have a very small knowledge, the path to a good decision is very steep. &gt;&gt; Okay, that's an interesting concept. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, definitely. Well, um these were all my questions for you today. I don't know if you would like &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'd like to add something as well is that they um you know the a lot of people wonder why pilots go into the sim every six months when actually surgeons who also have people's lives in their hands don't. I honestly think that they should somehow but um in aviation the way the way the reason that it's like that is because we want people to always be safe. Okay. So um you go to the sim and then you work work work work work work and at at Emirates there was quite a lot of pressure before the sims you'd work for almost a month and then what you do when you work you refresh a lot of your knowledge you you learn things specific to the exercise but that gets you to study a lot of things in the books and you arrive at the sim with your knowledge at the best that it can be and then during the next six months the knowledge will go down but you gain experience of course throughout that period as well but sorry like this you gain experience and come a point your knowledge has gone down a bit. Okay, of course you've picked up because flights happened but that's what happens but it's always above the line knowledge wise and then you go back to the sim and you start again. Well, let's move my hand here on the screen and and they back here and then you go down. So in fact your your knowledge always goes like like this on a six months sort of thing and then after that if you get your upgrade you're going to work a lot and boom, you're gonna do a jump and if you become an instructor again you're going to do a jump. you change change machines, well, you learn a new machine. But it's interesting to to understand that. And if something happens on a flight, then again, you're going to do a jump because you're going to study what happened. You're going to try and improve, make sure that it doesn't happen again, rebound from something that was not as optimal as you would have liked. Um, but I thought I thought that was interesting to to mention as well that your knowledge is not always you're not always studying the books. Come a point. You need to live your life and experience your profession. with spontaneity, you know, and then there's a time to be back in the books. And but don't worry, uh even if the you don't have a SIM check every you only have a SIM check every six months, the company sends so much material, so many newsletters, so many reminders, so many new procedures that come out, notices from the manufacturer that you're always sort of learning at some point. &gt;&gt; Well, thank you for this uh for this information. &gt;&gt; Excellent. All right. Well, um, nice to talk with you, Donna, and I'll see you in the next episode. Thank you. &gt;&gt; All right. Can't wait. See you. &gt;&gt; Bye-bye, everybody. Bye. &gt;&gt; This podcast was brought to you by Airline Selection Program, a company that is focused on helping you succeed at airline selections. Our flagship course, Advanced Interview Course, has helped hundreds of pilots just like you become successful. Visit our website at online.airines selectionprogram.com and find out how you too can get the job of your dreams.